---
layout: post
title: "The Force Awakens"
---
A few months ago, after the latest Star Wars: The Force Awakens trailer was released, my therapist and I had a conversation. At that point, I had been in therapy for a few months to deal with depression and some other issues, but one of the recurring questions we were discussing is "when is the last time you remember being completely and unrelentingly happy?". I couldn't give him an answer until I saw that trailer - it was when The Phantom Menace trailer was released in the fall of 1998. I watched it over and over and over. I put it on a DVD and forced my family to watch it at Thanksgiving. I was so pumped. And that's how I felt after seeing The Force Awakens trailer. I was more cautious this time because I knew what happened when The Phantom Menace came out in theaters.

Yes, I saw it 7 times in theaters (no exaggeration). Yes, it had obvious issues with the pacing and the characters and the story. But there was something about it, and the entire prequel trilogy, that didn't sit well with me and I could never put my finger on it.

Here's the thing about the prequels: you know vaguely what's going to happen. It's difficult to be surprised by anything. But there's more to it than that. You KNOW the main protagonist is going to go dark side. You KNOW the Jedi, who are supposed to be champions of peace and justice, get wiped out. But as the movies go on, it gets worse than that. The Jedi are depicted as a ruling class, who feel entitled to a place in the governance of the Republic. They accept a clone army that is ENSLAVED AT BIRTH. Yeah, they become Imperial Stormtroopers, so of course it makes sense because the Empire is evil, but the Jedi accepted their servitude first. And maybe the Jedi, who were taken and indoctrinated from birth as well, don't see anything wrong with this. But we as viewers should.

Then there's The Force Awakens. Without getting into spoilers, here's why it's more like the original trilogy: it's the hero's journey. It's about people who are theoretically just like you and I doing things that lead them into the greater adventure because it's, as Finn says, "the right thing to do". You have two opposing sides, one representing all of the privelege and entitlement associated with the dark side and driving their motivations. Then you have the other side, recognizing the flaws and humanity (to use the term loosely) of each other and throwing their lot together to resist the entitled grasping of evil.

I was born into a fortunate situation. Yes, my dad was a teacher, and yes, my mom has Lupus and wasn't able to work, but we always were able to make ends meet. My grandparents were always there to take on a lot of our burdens. The Catholic Church I grew up in understood and reinforced the concept of community service and the joys of giving. I've been very priveleged in my life - I've never had everything, but I've always had enough. And this is why Star Wars is so important to me. You have Luke Skywalker, a farm boy who comes from a rough planet and leaves there with nothing, who throws everything that he has - which is to say, himself - into a fight for justice and freedom. He literally has nothing but he accomplishes so much - how can we who have more do any less?

The Force Awakens that brings this concept back to the Star Wars universe. That it doesn't matter where you start, only THAT you start. That ordinary people can inspire just by giving of themselves and supporting others. That to whom much is given, much is required. I will probably write a second part to this after the movie leaves theaters because I'd like to address specific scenes from it, but to me, The Force Awakens is what Star Wars is about. And I'm grateful that it's back.